# Day 13 - Claw Contraption

> [<- Yesterday](12.md) | [Tomorrow ->](14.md)

Slow for Part 1 since I did it the "right" way, but I got a super fast delta and pretty low rank in the world! Proud that I mathed my way out of this one.

|      | Part 1 | Part 2 | Total     |
|------|--------|--------|-----------|
| Time | 13:28  | 2:10   | Σ = 15:38 |
| Rank | 1039   | 248    | μ = 644   |

## Problem Summary

You are given two buttons (A and B) which each move a claw in a claw machine to the right and forward. Each time you press a button, it always moves the same distance or number of units, which are given for A and B. You are given the coordinates of one prize in that machine and the goal is to spend the fewest tokens to move the claw directly over the prize. Button A costs 3 tokens per press, and B costs 1 token per press. Some prizes are impossible to hover over due to the combination of button distances.

For each claw machine (with its own set of buttons and prize location), what is the fewest number of tokens you can spend to get all the possible prizes?

## Part 1

I immediately assumed this was a system of equations. I say assumed instead of realized because I wasn't sure how to articulate it in my head, but I was pretty sure about the reasoning.

Now that I've had time to formalize it, my solution avoids the kind of red herring in the problem that makes it seem like we need to optimize for number of tokens used. Rather, since the system of equations has two unknowns (number of button presses for each button) and two equations (one for X and one for Y), there is always a unique solution.

Example:

```math
 \begin{cases} a * A_x + b * B_x = G_x\\ a * A_y + b * B_y = G_y \end{cases}
 ```

So what I did was use [`sympy`, a Python library for symbolic mathematics](https://docs.sympy.org/latest/index.html), to construct that system of equations and then solve it numerically. If the numerical solutions were integers, then I knew that it was possible to press the buttons a whole number of times to reach the goal. Then since it's a unique solution, it is therefore the best solution, and I can then multiply the button presses by the given number of tokens.

```python
from helpers.datagetter import aocd_data_in
import sympy as sp

din, aocd_submit = aocd_data_in(split=True, numbers=True)

tokens = 0

for i in range(0, len(din), 4):
    buttonA = din[i]
    buttonB = din[i+1]
    goal = din[i+2]

    a, b = sp.symbols('a, b', real=False)
    ans = sp.nsolve((sp.Eq(a * buttonA[0] + b * buttonB[0], goal[0]),
                   sp.Eq(a * buttonA[1] + b * buttonB[1], goal[1])),
                   (a, b), (-1, 1))
    if ans[0] % 1 == 0 and ans[1] % 1 == 0:
        tokens += ans[0] * 3 + ans[1]

aocd_submit(int(tokens))
```

## Part 2

Even though I didn't necessarily anticipate the large number being added in Part 2, I am happy that my Part 1 solution was the "right" solution to do Part 2 effectively. All I had to do was add 10 trillion to the goals and then add a `try ... except` block around the `nsolve` function call since it was throwing a ValueError for some of the particularly hard ones to solve, or something like that. I figured that it would easily come up with the solution when they were integers anyway, so I just ignored the ValueErrors and that solved it.

```python
from helpers.datagetter import aocd_data_in
import sympy as sp

din, aocd_submit = aocd_data_in(split=True, numbers=True)

tokens = 0

for i in range(0, len(din), 4):
    buttonA = din[i]
    buttonB = din[i+1]
    goal = [n + 10000000000000 for n in din[i+2]]

    try:
        a, b = sp.symbols('a, b', real=False)
        ans = sp.nsolve((sp.Eq(a * buttonA[0] + b * buttonB[0], goal[0]),
                    sp.Eq(a * buttonA[1] + b * buttonB[1], goal[1])), (a, b), (-1, 1))
        if ans[0] % 1 == 0 and ans[1] % 1 == 0:
            tokens += ans[0] * 3 + ans[1]
    except ValueError:
        pass

aocd_submit(int(tokens))
```
